.\" arch-recovery.1 — manual page for the Arch System Recovery Toolkit
.\" Generate HTML preview: man2html arch-recovery.1
.\" View locally:          man ./man/arch-recovery.1
.TH ARCH\-RECOVERY 1 "2026-03-23" "arch\-recovery 1.1.2" "Arch Linux Utilities"

.SH NAME
arch\-recovery \- Arch Linux system recovery toolkit

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B arch\-recovery
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBarch\-recovery\fR is a modular recovery toolkit for
Arch-based Linux systems.
It is designed to run from a live USB environment and repair common boot
failures without requiring expert knowledge of every recovery step.

Supported repair operations include rebuilding the initramfs with
\fBmkinitcpio\fR(8), reinstalling \fBGRUB\fR or \fBsystemd-boot\fR,
validating and repairing \fI/etc/fstab\fR, repairing the pacman keyring,
setting up network connectivity, and rolling back BTRFS snapshots.

The tool works in three primary modes:
.IP \(bu 2
\fBInteractive\fR — guided prompts; safest for beginners
.IP \(bu 2
\fBTUI\fR — full-screen menu using \fBwhiptail\fR(1) or \fBdialog\fR(1)
.IP \(bu 2
\fBAuto\fR — fully non-interactive; suitable for scripts

All modes produce a detailed log in a private per-session directory under
\fI/tmp/arch-recovery-session.*\fR. The exact path is printed at startup.

.SH OPTIONS

.SS Modes
.TP
.B \-\-tui
Launch the full-screen terminal menu.
Requires \fBwhiptail\fR(1) or \fBdialog\fR(1); falls back to a pure-bash
numbered menu if neither is available.
.TP
.B \-\-auto
Non-interactive mode. Auto-detects all partitions and performs all default
repairs without prompting.
.TP
.B \-\-diagnose
Scan the system and report problems. Makes \fBzero\fR changes to the target
system. Useful as a first step when you don't know what is wrong.
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Simulate every action and log what would happen, but write nothing to disk.
Safe to run at any time.

.SS Devices
.TP
.BI \-\-root " DEVICE"
Specify the root partition explicitly (e.g.\ \fI/dev/sda2\fR,
\fI/dev/nvme0n1p2\fR).
If omitted, auto-detection is attempted.
.TP
.BI \-\-boot " DEVICE"
Specify a separate \fI/boot\fR partition when the installed system uses one.
.TP
.BI \-\-efi " DEVICE"
Specify the EFI System Partition (e.g.\ \fI/dev/sda1\fR).
If omitted, auto-detection is attempted.

.SS Repair selection
All repair steps are enabled by default. Use the following flags to skip
individual steps.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-initramfs
Skip the \fBmkinitcpio \-P\fR rebuild.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-bootloader
Skip bootloader reinstallation.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-fstab
Skip \fI/etc/fstab\fR validation and repair.
.TP
.B \-\-repair\-keyring
Additionally repair the pacman keyring and refresh the mirrorlist.
Disabled by default; requires network access.
.TP
.B \-\-setup\-network
Configure network connectivity before chrooting.
Supports NetworkManager (\fBnmcli\fR(1)), \fBiwctl\fR(1),
\fBwpa_supplicant\fR(8), and \fBdhclient\fR(8).

.SS BTRFS snapshots
.TP
.B \-\-list\-snapshots
List all BTRFS subvolumes on the root device. Mounts at \fBsubvolid=5\fR
(top-level) to inspect the full subvolume tree.
.TP
.BI \-\-rollback " SNAPSHOT"
Roll back the root subvolume to \fISNAPSHOT\fR. The current root subvolume
is renamed to \fI@.broken-TIMESTAMP\fR before the rollback so it can be
recovered if needed.

.SS Post-repair verification
.TP
.B \-\-health\-check
Run a post-repair verification scan inside the chroot. Checks kernel
images, initramfs, bootloader config, EFI entries, and filesystem metadata.
Produces a pass/warn/fail summary.

.SS Self-update
.TP
.BI \-\-update
Check GitHub for a newer release and install it if one is available.
Requires a verified release bundle asset and matching \fI.sha256\fR file,
plus \fBcurl\fR(1), \fBtar\fR(1), and \fBsha256sum\fR(1). Authenticated
releases also include a signed manifest verified by \fBssh-keygen\fR(1).
.TP
.B \-\-check\-update
Check for updates without installing.

.SS Verbosity
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Show extra diagnostic detail on stderr.
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Trace every command as it executes. Implies \fB\-\-verbose\fR.
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-silent
Suppress all output except errors.
.TP
.BI \-\-log\-level " LEVEL"
Set verbosity explicitly. \fILEVEL\fR is one of:
\fBsilent\fR, \fBnormal\fR, \fBverbose\fR, \fBdebug\fR.

.SS Information
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a usage summary and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the version number and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-changelog
Print the changelog and exit.

.SH SHELL LAUNCHERS
.TP
.B arch\-recovery
Bash entry point (default). Requires Bash 4.2 or newer.
.TP
.B arch\-recovery.fish
Fish shell wrapper. Delegates to the bash entry point.
.TP
.B arch\-recovery.sh
POSIX \fBsh\fR / \fBdash\fR / \fBzsh\fR wrapper.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I /tmp/arch-recovery-session.XXXXXX/recovery-toolkit.log
Full log of all operations performed during the current session.
The exact session directory is printed at startup and persists until reboot.
.TP
.I /etc/pacman.d/mirrorlist
Modified by \fB\-\-repair\-keyring\fR.
.TP
.I /mnt/recovery
Default mount point used for the target root filesystem.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Guided interactive recovery (recommended for first-time users):
.B sudo arch\-recovery

.TP
Full-screen menu:
.B sudo arch\-recovery \-\-tui

.TP
Diagnose without making changes:
.B sudo arch\-recovery \-\-diagnose

.TP
Fully automated repair:
.B sudo arch\-recovery \-\-auto

.TP
Preview what would happen, in detail:
.B sudo arch\-recovery \-\-dry\-run \-\-verbose

.TP
Specify partitions explicitly:
.B sudo arch\-recovery \-\-root /dev/sda2 \-\-boot /dev/sda1 \-\-efi /dev/sda3

.TP
Auto-repair plus keyring fix:
.B sudo arch\-recovery \-\-auto \-\-repair\-keyring

.TP
List available BTRFS snapshots:
.B sudo arch\-recovery \-\-list\-snapshots \-\-root /dev/sda2

.TP
Roll back to a BTRFS snapshot:
.B sudo arch\-recovery \-\-rollback @2024-01-15 \-\-root /dev/sda2

.TP
Repair only initramfs (skip bootloader):
.B sudo arch\-recovery \-\-auto \-\-no\-bootloader

.SH SUPPORTED SYSTEMS
.IP \(bu 2
Arch Linux and Arch-based distributions (Manjaro, EndeavourOS, etc.)
.IP \(bu 2
Filesystems: \fBBTRFS\fR (with automatic subvolume detection), \fBext4\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Encryption: \fBLUKS\fR (single-layer)
.IP \(bu 2
LVM volume group detection and activation
.IP \(bu 2
Bootloaders: \fBGRUB\fR (UEFI x86_64), \fBsystemd-boot\fR
.IP \(bu 2
Architecture: x86_64 only

.SH LIMITATIONS
.IP \(bu 2
UEFI systems only (no legacy BIOS / MBR GRUB)
.IP \(bu 2
Single-layer LUKS only (no LUKS-on-LVM)
.IP \(bu 2
Does not repair filesystem corruption (\fBfsck\fR(8) must be run manually)
.IP \(bu 2
Does not install kernels or packages
.IP \(bu 2
No Secure Boot re-enrollment

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Recovery or scan completed successfully.
.TP
.B 1
Fatal error encountered. See the session log path printed by arch-recovery.
.TP
.B 130
Interrupted by user (SIGINT / Ctrl-C).

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mkinitcpio (8),
.BR grub-install (8),
.BR bootctl (1),
.BR cryptsetup (8),
.BR btrfs-subvolume (8),
.BR arch-chroot (8),
.BR lsblk (8),
.BR blkid (8)

.SH AUTHORS
Maintained at https://github.com/sumesh-s-dev/arch-system-recovery

.SH LICENSE
MIT License. See the LICENSE file in the source distribution.
